# Freshwater fish functional and taxonomic diversity above and below Niagara Falls
## Environmental Biology of Fishes
## Authors: Karl A. Lamothe, Justin A. G. Hubbard,2, D. Andrew R. Drake

##Abstract 
The Niagara River, which connects two Great Lakes (Erie and Ontario) and forms a border between Canada and the United States, has experienced decades of abiotic and biotic disturbance as well as long-term restoration efforts. Given the iconic riverscape and importance as a binational fisheries resource, a biodiversity assessment of the mainstem Niagara River fish assemblage is overdue. Here, fish assemblage and habitat data from a standardized boat electrofishing program of the Niagara River were combined with species trait data related to substrate associations, diet preferences, reproductive strategies, and body size to quantify biodiversity patterns among river sections (sites above and below Niagara Falls), seasons (spring, summer, fall), and years (2015-2017). Sixty-five species were captured representing a variety of trait combinations. Significant differences in functional dispersion and divergence (i.e., functional diversity) were observed between river sections, seasons, and (or) years. The fish community captured in the lower river in spring 2015 had both the highest average functional dispersion (2.08 ± 0.32 SD) and divergence (0.88 ± 0.04 SD) compared to the other seasonal sampling efforts, but relatively few fish were captured (n = 686 fish). Although non-native fishes represented a small portion of the catch over the three years (8.6% of catch), the seasonal presence (spring and fall) of mostly introduced large-bodied salmonids expanded functional trait space in the lower river during these periods. The importance of rare species on functional diversity metrics suggests further insight on local species detection probabilities is needed to understand if differences in functional diversity reflect ecological patterns or are driven by sampling design.

##Acknowledgments
This work was made possible by the many individuals involved in field sampling, including Robin Gáspárdy, Jason Barnucz, Calder Robinson, Meg Sheldon, Kurtis Smith, Sara Smith, Noel Soogrim, Erik Tuononen, Alex Verkuyl, Nicholas Wasilik, Carly White, Mallory Wiebe, and Kirsten Wuerch. Funding for sampling was provided by Environment and Climate Change Canada's Great Lakes Action Plan program and Fisheries and Oceans Canada. Boat electrofishing was conducted under Animal Use Protocol AUP 1322-A and Standard Operating Protocol GWACC-111. All sampling was approved by the Environment and Climate Change Canada and Fisheries and Oceans Canada Animal Care Committee (operated under the approval of the Canadian Council on Animal Care). Funding for KAL was provided through a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Visiting Fellowship with Fisheries and Oceans Canada and the Canadian Freshwater Species at Risk Research Network.


